good evening could I have the first
slide please
thank you on the 16th of April we set
out our five tests for adjusting the
lockdown and since then they have guided
our path at every stage
we've diligently assess our progress
against these five tests before making
changes and it has meant that we have so
far avoided the catastrophe of a second
peak of infection that could have been
overwhelmed the NHS and meant so many
more lives lost
next slide please so our first test is
to protect the NHS's
ability to cope so we're confident that
we're able to provide sufficient
critical care and specialists to
treatment right across the UK well the
NHS coped fantastically under the
extraordinary pressure of this pandemic
on the 20th of June 283 people were
admitted to hospital with coronavirus in
England Wales and Northern Ireland down
from 438 two weeks earlier and down from
a peak of 3432 on the 1st of April and
on the 22nd of June 340 patients with
coronavirus were in mechanical
ventilation beds in the UK down from 513
two weeks earlier and down from a peak
of 3301
on the 12th of April these numbers
provide confidence that we are still
fleeting the first test so next slide
please our second test is to see a
sustained and consistent fall in the
daily death rates from kovat 19 so they
were confident that we've moved beyond
the peak of those who tested positive
for coronavirus across all settings it
saddens me to report that 40 2927
have now died 171 fatalities were
reported in the 24 hours till 5:00 p.m.
yesterday
a further 109 deaths which occurred in
April May and June have been identified
and added to the total as measured by a
seven-day rolling average the UK daily
death rate now stands at 121 down from
216 two weeks ago and down from a peak
of 943 on the 14th of April the second
test therefore is still being met next
slide please
our third test is to receive reliable
data from sage showing that the rate of
infection is decreasing to manageable
levels across the board in total three
hundred and six thousand two hundred and
ten people have now tested positive for
coronavirus which is an increase of 874
cases since yesterday the seven-day
rolling average of new positive cases is
now 1147 down from 1543 two weeks ago
and down from a peak of 5195 on the 14th
of april approximately one in 1,700
people in the community in England are
now estimated to have the virus which is
down from one in four hundred four weeks
ago
sage believes infections across the UK
are shrinking at a steady rate of
between four and two percent every day
based on all the various data available
the government is confident that the
third test is being met next slide
please
our fourth test is that we must be
confident that the range of operational
challenges including on testing capacity
and personal protective equipment are in
hand with supply able to meet future
demand yesterday two hundred and thirty
seven thousand one hundred and forty two
tests were carried out or posted across
the UK come
to around 12,000 at the start of April
the new NHS test and trace service has
already advised over 87,000 people to
self isolate who might otherwise have
unwittingly transmitted the virus
we have contracted with over 175 new
suppliers able to deliver PPE at the
scale and the pace the UK requires and
this progress means we are satisfied
that the fourth Test is being met next
slide please
our fifth and final test is that we must
be confident that any adjustments to the
current measures will not risk a second
peak of infections than might overwhelm
the NHS I'm once again grateful to the
chief scientific adviser and the chief
medical officer for their advice on the
measures that I'm about to set out I can
confirm that the government judges that
we have met the fifth Test and were
there full satisfied that all five tests
are still being met so on the 11th of
May we set out our plan to recover and
that plan as you may remember set out
three steps for adjusting the lockdown
step one was implemented as we set out
on the 13th of May enabling people to
spend more time outdoors step two was
implemented as planned in phases on the
1st and the 15th of June shops have
opened children have started to return
to school and people have been able to
see more of their loved ones now step
three can be implemented as planned on
the 4th of July all the measures I am
about to set out apply to England of
course the devolved administration's are
responsible for adjusting lock down in
Scotland Wales and Northern Ireland
moving at the pace that they believe is
right for them after a long period of
asking you the British public to follow
very strict and complex rules to bring
coronavirus under control
we can now make life easier for people
to see more of their friends and family
and to help businesses get back on their
feet and people back into jobs
critically we can make a change to the
guidance on to meters which kept us safe
while transmission of the virus was high
which can now be modified having
considered all the evidence while
staying at 2 meters is preferable we can
now move to 1 meter plus where it is not
possible for us to stay two meters apart
that means staying one meter apart plus
mitigations which reduce the risk of
transmission and these precautions could
include installing screens making sure
that people face away from each other
providing hand-washing facilities
minimizing the amount of time you spend
with people outside your household and
and of course being outdoors on public
transport it already means 1 meter plus
means wearing a face covering for
mitigation as as everybody I think now
understands we are setting out kovetz
secure guidance to help businesses to
take the measures that are right for
them we can also allow more sectors to
reopen on the 4th of July as planned in
step 3
so from the 4th of July the following
premises will be allowed to reopen
provided they are coded secure hotels
bed-and-breakfast and self-contained
holiday accommodation caravan parks and
campsites places of worship and
libraries restaurants and cafes bars
pubs social clubs cinemas and bingo
halls museums and galleries hair salons
and barbers outdoor playgrounds and
outdoor gyms this has been an incredibly
tough time for all these establishments
but I hope that everyone working in them
can take confidence in knowing they will
be able to open their doors once again
in just a couple of weeks time and of
course it goes without saying they
should do so in a way that is co-leads
secure keeping customers and staff safe
but I'm afraid to say that as things
stand some premises such as nightclubs
swimming pools indoor gyms must remain
closed for the time being given the
particular risks of transmission in
those settings however we are
establishing task forces now for those
sectors to establish how they too can
open in a covert secure way as fast as
possible at the same time we can give
people more freedom to see their friends
and family from the 4th of July your
household will be able to meet with one
other household at a time including
staying over this can be indoors or
outside at your home in a restaurant or
pub or in paid accommodation I wanna
stress you should remain socially
distant from anyone outside your
household for meeting outdoors you can
continue to meet in a park or a garden
in a group of up to six people drawn
from six different households again at
all times you should maintain social
distancing from anyone outside your
household as we give people back more
control over their lives we will be
asking them to follow guidance on
limiting their social contact rather
than forcing them to do so through
legislation and this obviously requires
everyone to act responsibly which I have
no doubt they will do it will still be
possible for the police to break up
large and irresponsible gatherings but
neither the police themselves or
the public that they serve want
virtually every aspect of our behavior
to be subject to the criminal law
yesterday the deputy chief medical
officer and the health secretary set out
updated advice for those who are
shielding in England so that they can
soon start to return to leading more
normal lives opening up more of Britain
in this kovat secure way is only
possible if everyone continues to stay
alert to the risks of coronavirus that
means you should stay two metres apart
if you can't do that then keep one meter
apart with mitigations wash your hands
regularly wear face coverings on public
transport all wear your indoors in a
crowded environment where we're
distancing is not possible follow the
rules when visiting businesses crucially
get a test done immediately
if you develop symptoms and self isolate
self isolate if you're asked to do so by
NHS tests and trace we're only able to
make these changes because we have
persevered together and stuck to our
path we had five tests and we met them
we had a plan and we stuck to it the
government has asked a huge amount of
all of you and you've met that challenge
the people of this country have met that
challenge with good humour and uncommon
sense of course the fight is far from
over this is a nasty virus still that
wants to take advantage of our
carelessness there will be I'm afraid
there will be local outbreaks and I must
tell you that if the virus were to begin
to run out of control I will not
hesitate to put on the handbrake and
verse some of these changes at local or
indeed national level as required but we
can avoid that if we all continue to
stay alert and do our bit to control the
virus the British public have proved
again and again not that it was ever in
doubt that they can be trusted to do the
right thing and to do it with common
sense that there is no doubt we're
beating back this virus and with your
continued cooperation and good judgment
we will beat it once and for all I now
have to - Chris no - Patrick sorry at
the fastest first line please
so just to go over some of the numbers
to remind you the latest are value for
the UK is between point seven point nine
that seems to be below one everywhere
across the UK we're getting updated
numbers again later this week so
everything looks like the numbers
continued to go down and the epidemic
continues to shrink albeit slowly at a
rate of something between two and four
percent per day next slide please
this indicates from the ons the office
from that office for national statistics
survey what the estimate of the number
of people with Kove it is in the UK and
you can see it runs from the 25th of
April through to the 13th of June and
there's a steady decrease in the number
of people with kovat from somewhere
above 0.3% 2.06 percent of the
population with it but you can also see
that it's flattening off it's not going
right down to zero and that's important
to remember the infection is still here
next slide please
estimated 33,000 people with kovat
infection in the community over the
period of the study most recent period
of the study that's point zero six
percent of the population with kovat
still present and just as a reminder
something in the order of five percent
of people have antibodies to this
disease
now suggesting that the number of people
who has been infected is still limited
across the UK and most of us have not
had the disease and therefore remain
fully susceptible to it next slide
please
unfortunately many people have died and
this shows the figures for deaths
against the average over the past five
years so in the top curve the green
curve you see the deaths for this year
with the peak which is due to co2 Co vyd
in the dotted line you see the average
for the five years previously and what
you can see is that we are coming back
down to average levels of death for the
UK now and that's due in the purple line
to the decrease in Cova deaths and the
other consequences of the covert
infection so it is coming back down
towards baseline towards normal but
don't be fooled that this means it's
gone away the disease is growing across
the world it's coming down in the UK but
it hasn't gone away and we need to be
absolutely sure that with the new
relaxation that we stay rigorously to
the things that need to happen in order
to stop the spread contact to contact to
stop the networks of spread developing
and to make sure that kovetz secure
really means Cove is secured by the way
we all adhere to it thank you
thanks very much Patrick Chris did you
want to add something just add a few
comments Prime Minister to what you said
from a medical point of view and this is
really because all of us in every
country are having to find a sustainable
balance because we have to live
alongside this virus for the foreseeable
future and find a way no decision is
going to be risk-free it's about finding
a balance of risks that is allows us to
operate in a reasonably normal way for a
prolonged period and I think it's just
worth situating the decisions that have
been taken in terms of the multi-layer
defense that all of us have to be part
of to stop this coming back in large
numbers
the first thing is we all need to take
part in isolating the virus if we have
symptoms of cough or fever of losing a
smell or sense of taste
then we must self isolate immediately
and we must ask for a test we must get
our households to self isolate and
that's because if we have got the virus
if I ever got the virus
then the rest of the household have a
very high chance of having caught the
virus and then the if the test is
positive
NHS tests and trace will try and find
close contacts over the previous few
days so that they can be isolated to
make sure that anyone with the virus who
hasn't yet developed symptoms it's taken
out of the general population at home
and that reduces the transmission so
it's the first thing isolating the virus
we all have to be part of that the
second is we all have to do the things
which individually make it harder for
the virus to be passed on and washing
hands absolutely critical because one of
the ways you pass it on is by touching
surfaces are being contaminated covering
mouths for coughs and wearing face
coverings in in situations where you
can't keep a distance such as public
transport or many shops but the third
group of things that we have to do are
things which link households together
and a lot of the changes may today are
around the way in which we reduce the
risk of transmitting between one
household and another household and some
of that is trying to encourage people
only to have two households in any given
time indoors with a bit more flexibility
outdoors because the risk is much lowers
not zero outdoors and then in
environments like shops and restaurants
and pubs to make sure that we can meet
together in a safer not to say not
completely safe but a safer way and a
lot of the changes are about emphasizing
things that we can do and it is really
critical that individuals and firms take
these really seriously because if we
don't take them seriously then change
the transmission between households will
be really established and they include
staying at two metres if people
can if that is not possible in a
particular environment
there are several things as the Prime
Minister said which can be done to
reduce the risk so that it is broadly
similar to what it would be at two
meters these include things like
orientation people making sure people
are not face-to-face it would might
include physical barriers it might
include things like ventilation it might
include face coverings and it certainly
includes in all situations regularly
cleaning areas that people frequently
touch but there's a long list of them
there's what's known in nine steps of
different things which people can do to
improve the chances that people will not
pass on the virus even if they have it
without knowing about it
and then the final to this shielding
program for the most vulnerable people
which the Prime Minister's talked about
which we've had modifications to that
word talked about yesterday and the very
final one which is one more more widely
which is the effort of science to come
up with cures with vaccines with
diagnostic things to help us and the
paper from the UK that looked at the
dexamethasone showing that that reduce
mortality was published online today for
example as one of the first steps to get
on top of this from a science point of
view but to be to be really clear it is
absolutely critical as every individual
every household and every firm takes
these precautions seriously because if
that does not happen we will go back to
a situation where where transmission
starts to rise again thank you very much
thanks very much Chris and and thanks
battery let's go to to question actually
before we go to questions I just want to
tell everybody that we're going to be
winding down I'm afraid the rhythm of
these press conferences though I know
that they've become a great point of
focus and I want to that's basically
because we're continuing to make great
progress in controlling the virus and we
want to make sure that we have something
really important to say I want to thank
Chris and Patrick for their really
heroic work in presenting information to
the public so clearly and so powerfully
and I want to stress also that we would
of course be keeping you informed as I
as I said I'm afraid there probably will
be more outbreaks or certainly local
outbreaks and I don't think therefore
that you've seen the last of us by any
means but they will not be happening as
often as they have been however we will
be making sure that all the information
that you want that you normally get in
the slide packs will be available at on
the website at gov dot uk'
now we're going to go to our questions
first of all from the public can we go
first Susanne in in Chesterfield Susanne
well more primary care and dental
practices be encouraged to work normally
again now that the threat level is at
three we are seeing large numbers of
patients refer to the emergency
department because their GP or dentists
are refusing face-to-face consultations
how soon will they be getting back to
normal right well thanks very much
Suzanne as as as far as I know we dental
care certainly and prior and primary
care dental care we got back a few weeks
ago and in the NHS and primary care
should be functioning as normally as
possible we do want people to be taking
advantage of the of this moment if they
do have conditions that need to be
attended to go to your doctor go to go
to any one of the the most important
successes that we've had is protecting
NHS capacity we don't want to see people
suffer through not now using the NHS as
Suzanne but I think I should probably
ask the chief medical officer to give
some further comment
thank you the general practitioners have
GPS have of course been working
throughout this and done an absolutely
fantastic job if I may say so to my
colleagues inevitably to reduce the risk
of transmission to reduce the risk that
people come into contact in waiting
rooms and indeed between clinical staff
and patients they have changed the way
they've worked and many of the
changes of actually things that make
sense for the longer term even if it
wasn't for coronavirus but of course
they're having to go step by step back
to a more normal way of providing the
care that they do they always have and
they always will but there is a steady
movement in that direction and GPS are
working the whole time to try and
improve that dental care was a slightly
different situation and emergency care
obviously had continued throughout the
period but it is particularly high risks
because you're generating a lot of
potentially aerosols certainly a lot of
droplets around people's mouths where if
they were infected you're getting very
close so the people had to be very
cautious about this but as the Prime
Minister has said dental work has again
started to start it up again carefully
at first but gradually people are
finding ways of operating which actually
are going to work in this new
environment we will be in for a really
quite prolonged period brilliant thank
you very much Suzanne let's go to
Christine in in Lincoln Christine asks
coronavirus has been found in meat
processing factories what steps are
public health taking to protect the
public from contaminated meat finding
out why this is happening in protecting
the production workers well there's a
very good question which has become up
several times with me to me today we are
aware of this particular issue with meat
processing factories I think that both
Patrick and Chris have might have
something to say on this well I'll maybe
say something about meat in the pan the
Food Standards Agency is look carefully
at where the meat is is a vector for
transmitting and I think the risk there
is thought to be very low so I think the
meat itself is not so much the issue but
the environment of which this takes
place is and well features perhaps and
Chris may want to say more about meat
processing factories they're cold and we
know the virus prefers it in the cold
there's often difficulty in keeping
people physically separated so there's
that whole problem of proximity
they're often loud so there's often
people speaking quite loudly and there
are places where people go and huddled
have their coffee and so on and so there
are places where people can end up
infecting each other so the environment
itself is rather a difficult one in
terms of the the risk and the behaviors
that need to be in place in order to
reduce those risks but Chris you may
want to add to that no I think what are
the only code add so that is in in many
environments it looks as if things like
meat packing will be included in this
but also places like healthcare settings
actually very often lead the area of
maximum risk is social areas or communal
areas where people have food or have
breaks so it's important to think both
about the work environment but also the
social environment around that work and
meat but the meat packing factories
abattoirs and indeed food processing and
packing areas have led to several
outbreaks around the world and therefore
they are an area where we can have to
take the mitigations particularly
seriously thanks very much both can we
go to Laura Kunz burg please of the BBC
thank you very much indeed mr. Johnson
and the two scientists sound notably
cautious this afternoon Prime Minister
opening up does open up more risks to
our health will you take responsibility
whatever happens next
and professor Witte you previously said
very clearly you would like to see the
2-meter will stay till the end of the
pandemic have you changed your mind what
can I say Laura that I think that it is
absolutely right for everybody to be
cautious right now and I hope that
everybody listening to what we've set
out can understand the the balance in
this package and the need to have a
gradual opening up combined with
continued measures to prevent the spread
of the virus and to restrict social
contact and that it's very clear that
that is that that is precisely how and
why were able to move forward with the
the opening up the reopening in the way
that we are and yes of course Laura I
take a responsibility the government
takes responsibility for these decisions
were indebted to our scientific
colleagues for their advice continually
but
these are responsibilities to choose on
the two meters and one of many answers
which I've given in interview in in
these press conferences where I've
probably used rather more shorthand than
ideally would do but as the Prime
Minister made clear the advice to use
stay at 2 meters if you can steer 2
meters remains so what changes is that
there are environments where that isn't
possible and what the scientific
environmental groups have looked at and
they looked at this very carefully is if
people take them seriously if they apply
them as best you know it properly it is
possible to reduce the risk in a very
structured way down to something which
is broadly equivalent to the to 2 meters
but that's not something we in ordinary
environments you're going to be wanting
or needing to do so as I say advice on 2
metres remains and the 1 metre is a 1
meter plus mitigations which bring it
into line with other areas and that's
why we need people must take it
incredibly seriously thanks very much
Laura can we go to Robert Peston of ITV
Robert good afternoon gentlemen
and can I ask all three of you whether
we can expect any further relaxation of
social distancing until we've got a
workable vaccine or you're confident the
majority of us are immune which you know
you've said in the past could be many
many months away and secondly
specifically for the prime minister and
Prime Minister what assessment have you
made of the damage to the economy and
the potential impact on unemployment of
asking business to follow these rules
well I have I just have a quick both in
there and then perhaps scientific
medical colleagues can comment on the on
the the changes in social distancing
themselves but from my own perspective
and obviously we have to look at all
these things in the round that the thing
that's really changing at the moment is
is not just that we've got the are down
which is very important we're also
seeing a reduction in the incidence of
the disease
the population robber so when four weeks
ago we'll say it was 1 in 400 it's now 1
in 1700 and so as that number goes goes
down or up if you if you prefer as the
your chances of coming into physical
proximity physical contact with somebody
else who has the viruses those chances
go down then of course there will be
further opportunities to vary what our
guidances and to try to get back to to
normal as fast as possible for as many
people as possible that will be the
approach that that we take and our
assessment of the the impact of the
changes that were making today is of
course that we hope that there will be
positive and then allow businesses to -
to reopen in a way that you know if I
think back even 6 weeks ago when we were
we first thought may the 10th when we
first set out this plan I think a lot of
people were saying to me at the time
that we'd be hard pushed to get to
opening up hospitality on July the 4th
so I you know I'm pleased that were in
the situation that we we are in that
sense I think that it's good that we're
sticking to the plan there will be you
know serious economic consequences
Robert from the whole pandemic there's
absolutely no doubt about that and we
will manage those as as as well as we
can and I've no doubt that the UK will
show enormous resilience and get through
it very well but you know this this
package I believe should be positive for
business in the important sense that it
combines reopening with the right degree
of caution so on the issue about
relaxation obviously the final decision
is for elected and democratically
elected ministers but in terms of what
is going to change things over the next
while we are going to be living with
this virus for a very long time if we
have to wait until natural immunity
finally yes on top of this we're talking
about a very long period obviously they
all hope of AXI
come earlier so what might change over
time it will include the epidemiology
and what goes down can go up winter for
example may change that might mean that
we actually have to increase some of the
measures equally maybe that the
epidemiology gets better over time
continues current damage range and we
could we could go downwards the second
thing that will change is the recent
thing the thing was published today on
dexamethasone is we hope only one of a
whole series of scientific advances that
will change our countermeasures and
therefore our understanding of the risk
and then the final thing is that our
science of the understanding of the
virus changes we when we started off
this pandemic we really had very limited
understanding about what countermeasures
of work we still have a long way to go
in terms of learning all the details
every few weeks we have a different
understanding of this virus and
therefore as our understanding changes
our can tomato changed in epidemiology
changes of course there may be
possibility to relax some things and the
maybe sometimes a need to increase
others so I think this shouldn't be seen
as a static picture for several
different reasons but it's going to be a
long haul and we really you know
everybody standing here fully
appreciates this is going to be a long
haul yes I mean I think this leaves us
in some way in a limited number of
options
somehow it burns itself out and
disappears seems extremely unlikely and
there's no evidence it's going to do
that and there's no particular pressure
on it to disappear in that way so I
think it circulates in the way that
Chris has said and we may expect to get
more of this in the winter the second is
that we do get a vaccine and there are
many vaccine projects across the world
some of them in the UK and the most
advanced probably is the one in the UK
from Oxford those vaccine projects of
course we can't bet on any one of them
winning but there are lots of them out
there so you'd be I think in a
moderately optimistic that one of them
will give something but you don't know
and the third is it's a Chris's point to
build on the successes so far which is
one drug which has antiviral effects of
some sort REM des Vere
and seems to shorten stay in hospital
another dexamethasone which reduces
death in those patients who require
oxygen in hospital
those are building blocks that have come
quite quickly if you think about it and
we'd expect to get more of those that
can gradually help so those are the
things which allow you to then limit the
sorts of distancing we have and as Chris
has said to build up a natural level of
immunity is gonna take a very long time
so I think we're with this for a long
time we hope that the vaccines and the
therapeutics come along soon and but
they're no guarantees on any of those
and therapeutics we've got a building
block we got a first step let's hope
that that progresses
more quickly to make this a manageable
disease which again would change some
other restrictions that you might need
to apply thanks very much Robert San
Coates the sky' Prime Minister um the
changes they even ounce today particular
ended that t meter rule will only apply
in England not to Scotland and Wales in
Northern Ireland
why do you think that is are the leaders
of the devolved governments making a
political point or just being drum
buckets and scare mongers what do you
know or do they just think that the
science which hasn't really been
published behind this decision doesn't
support the conclusions you've made
today and - Patrick valance and Chris
Witte you've been absolutely crystal
clear that the risks from coronavirus
haven't gone away and your tone is
noticeably more cautious than the prime
minister firstly how worried are you
that the public reaction to this overall
package might cause an uptick in
transmission and could you just put on
record do you both personally support
the whole package including the 2-meter
thing that you meet a rule change and
did sage officially fully approved the
whole package of changes well I am
respectfully gonna dissent from your
characterization of my and my tone today
I think I've been I've been absolutely
ruthlessly even-handed in the way that
I've set this out there are there is
progress that we are making important
changes that were able to make to begin
the opening up of the economy but I
think I could not have been clearer
that we must be we must be cautious and
you love you live herding all the things
that we've said about maintaining social
distancing all the mitigations for
getting down to one meter where you
can't do two meters I think people will
get the necessity for progressing with
caution which is what I'm recommending
or on the on the the four nations look
at all four CMOS all four chief medical
officers across all four Home Nations
came together to agree the the change in
the alert level from four to two three
and there is far more harmony believe me
between our approaches and you might
sometimes a pick up from some of the
weight is presented across the scene and
I've no doubt that the UK will continue
to advance in the same direction and
more or less the same pace so obvious is
I said earlier you know it is up to
devolved administration's to make their
their own dispensations and make their
own cases to meter because I stood here
before and said this and the date the
evidence is published actually which is
as Chris said earlier on two meters is
safer than one meter if it's all
unmitigated but if you add the
mitigations and this is all in the
papers that we published so if you start
looking at things like orientation are
you side by side or back to back these
ventilation good a face coverings being
wear worn or other screens in place
number of people in an enclosed
environment is an important thing you
don't want to pack lots of people in
irrespective of whether they're one
meter or two meters apart the time in
which people spend in certain
environments and the environment itself
as we've just discussed in terms of the
characteristics of that environment
those are all features which are
important and what we've said in the
work that's been done by the
environmental modeling group is that one
meter can be with mitigations in place
can be equivalent risk to two meters and
that's the basis for how you can make
decisions and those are then policy
decisions on the back of that in terms
of sage sage is clearly not
a decision-making body it's an advisory
body the advice goes to all four nations
and is used in all four nations and is
consistent across all four on an uptick
if people don't take the mitigation
seriously if people hear a distorted
version of what's being said that says
this is all fine now it's gone away and
start behaving in ways that they
normally would have before this virus
happened yes we will get an update for
sure so it is absolutely critical people
stick to the guidance that's been given
it's a change guidance but there are
still very significant restrictions
socially and there are very significant
restrictions on business of their
different sources really critical we do
that that may well be upticks anyway
there's certainly been local out roses
that the Prime Minister has said that is
to be expected with this personally am I
am i comfortable with it this is a
balance of risk
it's like many things in medicine you
don't go from operation in su up so you
have to it's a balance of risk and I
think that this is a reasonable balance
of risk
it is not risk-free absolutely nostril
is free nobody thinks it is and we may
at some point say that particular bit of
the decisions that were taken is too
much of a risk in with the benefit of
hindsight and we have to go back on it
but it is a balance of risk informed by
reasonable professional judgments as
patrick has said the job of advisors is
not to sign things off it is to give
advice and then finally I would just
like to make a point because I really
want to praise the work of my photo
chief medical officers across the UK we
have worked absolutely in lockstep my
first meeting this morning before 9
o'clock was with the chief medical
officers of the four nations and my last
meeting this evening will be a
teleconference with them and many other
senior clinicians we really do work
together we share the science we share
advice from sage and elsewhere we share
intelligence and we share opinions so I
do not want anyone to get the impression
it's perfectly reasonable for different
nations to take slightly different
approaches but the idea that there isn't
a technical underpinning that is a
shared understanding I really would like
to to quash that that would that would
be an incorrect impression
great thanks very much Sam it's good a
George Parker of EFT Thank You Prime
Minister can I just follow up on Sam's
question and put this directly to
battery balance I think Chris witty just
gave an answer to some second question
do you support a decision the
government's announced today to loosen
these restrictions on July the fourth
including the 2-meter rule and two prime
minister are speaking to a Conservative
MP today who said Kristen is going bust
people are scared to go out of their
homes to go back to the shops and pubs
I'm a little bit unclear about whether
you think it's a good idea to go out and
about now and if you do think that's a
good idea
what can the government do to give
people the confidence they need to get
the economy going again
so on the 2 meter I'm gonna I repeat
what I've said that actually I think you
can get to one meter with mitigations
which gives you the same risk as 2
meters and therefore that's a perfectly
reasonable approach to take provided as
Chris said the mitigation measures are
properly applied and people adhere to
them so there is a way to do that and
that's what the new rules say in terms
of the package that's been announced
it is not risk-free it cannot be
risk-free every time you take a step to
open up there is some associated risk
with that the right way to deal with
that is then to monitor measure and be
prepared to take steps to reverse things
as they need to be so in terms of is
this package one that is reasonable and
and one that actually would allow you to
do that and measure yes you can do this
and measure and you need to be prepared
where there's local outbreaks to deal
with them locally and if they become
beyond local then you need to deal with
them at regional national levels which
would mean reversal of some of the
measures and that is the only way in
which you can then keep on top of this
so measuring and monitoring becomes an
incredibly important part of this thanks
George let me just say I think it's
great to see people out shopping again
and frankly I can't wait to go to a pub
or a restaurant even if it may not be
wholly compatible with a new diet
that I'm on and I hope that people will
I really I think people need to go at it
I think people need to enjoy themselves
and and and rediscover things that they
have been able to do for a long time and
I want to see but I want to see activity
but let's be absolutely clear that I
also want to see everybody being careful
staying alert and following the guidance
and so far the I think everybody has
shown a massive common sense they've
worked together they've stuck to the the
plan we've got the thing under control
it's let's keep it under control we've
set out a way of doing it the guidance
is that let's follow it and then we can
make even more progress together can we
get them to mace a halt of The Daily
Express thank you very much Prime
Minister good afternoon to the
scientists you both said that we're in
this for the long haul with many of the
restrictions still as this is the last
these daily briefings what is your best
guess at the moment how long it's going
to take before we do finally see in the
back of that the hand sanitizers and the
face coverings is it is it going to be
years if we don't find a vaccine and
prime minister to pull up on George's
question really economic data suggests
that many households who've been
fortunate enough to stay in work built
up savings during the lockdown do you
really want to encourage those people to
get out and to spend and to get down the
pubs and similar miles and hairdressers
and make July the fourth a bit of a day
of national celebrations to kick off the
recovery and could I ask you Prime
Minister what is the one restored
freedom that you are most looking
forward to enjoying again on July the
4th well sorry well I can't put a time
on the how long this will take
and I think that the main ways in which
we get out of this I've described which
were either it goes away which I don't
think it will or we wait for a vaccine
and therapeutics to really enable us to
do it we're on the way with that with
therapeutics we're on the way with
therapeutics so there are some that does
create an opportunity and vaccines there
are projects in the clinic and we need
to wait and see whether any of those
have got the right profile to work and I
think those are the key ways in which we
think about exiting
this and I'm optimistic that somewhere
in there and I can't tell you exactly
where there's going to be some progress
and I think most likely in therapeutics
to start off with but fingers crossed
one of these vaccines will come good and
I think it's highly likely that one of
them will do something and we just need
to wait I'm afraid it's a game of
patience if I could and so I would be
surprised and delighted if we weren't in
this current situation through the
winter and into next spring I think then
let's regroup and work out where we are
but I expect there to be significant
amount of corona virus circulating at
least into that time and I think it's
going to be quite optimistic before the
results fully to come to the rescue over
that talk on a timeframe but I have an
absolute confidence in the capacity of
science to overcome infectious diseases
it has had done that repeatedly and it
will do that for this virus whether it's
by drugs vaccines or indeed other other
things that may come into play so you
know for the medium to long term I'm
optimistic but for the short to medium
term until this time next year certainly
I think we should be planning for this
for what I consider to be a long haul
out into 2021 yeah Mesa that's where all
things that I'm looking forward to well
those are very very long this I'd love
to go to the theater again I'm going to
see the globe I'd like to I'd like to go
to a restaurant frankly I would I would
love to get my hair cut I won't want to
make one thing clear I would love to
play village cricket again and I want to
stress that we are working on all of
these things we are working with all the
industries all the Performing Arts /
theatres with everybody gyms all the all
the bits that we can't quite do at the
moment
sports such as such as cricket we're
trying to make it work as fast as we
possibly can so don't think that this
this package represents this the summit
of our ambitions it's as far as we can
go for now but I want to stress again
you know we won't be able to make
further progress unless we continue to
work together to keep this to keep this
virus under control as for as for the
dry the fourth well III hope it will be
a great day but obviously you know
people have got to make sure they don't
overdo it and we can't have great sort
of I know that Chris is particularly
worried about this we can't have you
know great sort of writhing scenes in
the in the beer gardens when the virus
could be could be passed on this is
gotta be done in a sensible way giving
people should be giving their names to
the to the pub's to the to the
restaurants doing things in a way that
allows us if something does happen to
track back to tests and trace and stamp
out any any outbreak that's the
absolutely crucial thing so people
should of course enjoy themselves but as
Chris and Patrick have said you know
this is going to be with us for a while
and we've just got to adjust and and
make it work
let's go to Hugo guy of the eye i
minister you've said that one of the new
freedoms from the 4th of july is that
people can go on holiday within the UK
yes can people now also go on foreign
holidays if they're willing to observe
the 14 day quarantine when their and can
I also ask Sir Patrick and professor
Witte
are you both confident that the existing
tests and trace scheme is working
properly and is efficient enough to
crack down on any future localized
outbreaks well you guys very very
briefly as you know the current advice
is still the people should avoid a
non-essential travel but we'll be
reviewing the situation on the on the
29th we'll be looking at the the
quarantine rules and what we can do to
create air bridges so we are acutely
understand people's desire to do this
and need to need to know we will get on
with it
as fast as we can I think that the it is
very important for every country that
has really successfully cracked down on
this that we do have arrangements to
stop the virus being re-imported into
the country and
that's why the it's necessary to have
quarantine arrangements but you know I'd
also say the people this is a fantastic
country to go on holiday and you know
there should be you know I wouldn't
hesitate to recommend staycations as
well test and trace is already doing a
lot and that will be having an impact on
reducing infection the note the biggest
thing that I worry about if I'm honest
is that people don't report that they've
got symptoms so get a test and then if
someone is contacted by the NHS test and
Trace that they don't engage properly
with that process by reporting when
people have got symptoms getting a test
and if it's positive isolating that is a
huge service to the rest of society
because that is the way that we ensure
the people who have got the virus or
might have the virus get out of
circulation temporarily and that reduces
the risk to absolutely everybody so I
would really really want to stress the
importance of people engaging seriously
with this and Baroness Harding who's
died our Harding who's actually leading
this made clear right from the beginning
that it would take a while to reach
cruising altitude for this it is
improving everyday I see that the
day-to-day on this it will continue to
improve over the summer and it's already
making a contribution it will make her
more of a contribution and in due course
be a very major part of our defence
against the return in a big way of this
virus but it does depend on people
really engaging with it and engaging
with NHS tests and trace from the
symptoms all the way through to the
isolation brilliant thanks thanks Chris
and thanks you go let's go finally -
Jessica Frank keys of Eastern daily
press minister at the Eastern Daily
Press in Norfolk I've written a series
of reports into a generation of our most
vulnerable children and young people
being failed and forgotten during this
crisis experts fear the fail the scale
of the fallout that on those already
most at risk is being masked with
warnings of lifetime consequences for
children trapped in abusive homes cut
off from support services and facing
widening attainment gaps from wealthy
appears you've recently become a father
again and these systemic disadvantages
or challenges your son will never have
to face you've applauded footballer
Marcus rush hoods personal campaign
ensure no child goes hungry this summer
but these problems existed before the
coronavirus crisis hit I know the
government has launched the catch up
scheme but what will you personally do
and what long-term initiatives will you
bring forward to tackle these ingrained
inequalities and ensure no child is
forgotten well thanks thanks very much
Jessica and look I mean I I totally
agree with you about one of the most
unfair aspects of this of this crisis
which is that obviously the disease has
been discriminatory in the way it's hit
certain communities certain groups of
people well if you want to continue
watching this final Crona rious briefing
you can do so on the news channel but
nan unfair in the way that it is it is
impacted on young people's attention
children's education and there's no
doubt if you look at what's happening at
the moment one of the saddest things is
that it's it's kids from deprived
backgrounds who really need to be back
in school who perhaps aren't going back
in into the primary school classes that
are open in the numbers that they could
and sure and we really want to urge them
all now draw parents to get your kids
back into school into early as reception
year one year six they're there and
we're encouraging primary schools to
take more if they can more more you're
much more children more people as if
they can if they can fit them in because
that's about social justice
Jessica it's very very important that
kids get access to education it's also
important you'd ask what I'm going to do
personally now we've got to look at
what's happening across the whole of the
country and in in there are areas of the
country that do need more investment in
their schools in their school buildings
and we're going to be doing a lot on
that in their local infrastructure in
rural broadband in in Norfolk and we're
putting out a huge program to get rural
broadband in such a vital thing for
communities across the country that that
a more remote or have been left behind
but particularly for for young people
what I am for the children's school
would be never I want to see much more
direct
contact with with with teachers so that
more one-to-one tutoring of the kind
that were now supporting through the
catch-up program that Gavin Williamson
has has instituted I really think that
that's very very important not just for
kids who who are falling behind but for
all kids I think it make a huge
difference to their lives so those are
some of the things that we're doing
thank you very much thank you very much
Jessica well listen I think we should
probably conclude it that I just I just
I just want to say a couple of quick
things in in finally all kinds of things
have changed since this virus emerging
our understanding of the virus but some
important things have also changed in
our ability to fight it and I would
mention obviously the the huge efforts
of the public made to to control it but
also the appearance of dexamethasone
Ramdev severe but perhaps there's more
potential for packages of of drugs and
the UK playing a lead role in in
dexamethasone also test and trace this
can be as I said many weeks ago this can
be a real game-changer for us and and
the activities of the joint biosecurity
Centre also make a big difference
so although the virus is the is the same
and it's just as dangerous as it was
when our better at dealing with it I
think that should be giving people much
more confidence now as we go forward but
as I said as I've said throughout this
press conference this virus is still out
there the only way to beat it is to stay
alert to follow the guidance and to save
lives thank you all very much thank you
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC decoder UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News